[docs] Document object instantiation (#624)
apple/pkl: docs/modules/language-reference/pages/index.adoc

<<blank-identifiers,Blank Identifiers>> +
<<projects,Projects>>

[[the-meaning-of-new]]
=== The Meaning of `new`

> Pkl has no "true" object instantiation: the `new` keyword is a special case of <<amending-objects, amending>>.

Reviewer: nit: you could rephrase this sentence to be a bit less negative. Something like "Object instantiation in Pkl is actually just amending" or something of the sort.

Reviewer 2: Ditto--don't know what true instantiation is!

In Pkl, objects can be instantiated in three major ways:

> * Amending a property/entry `someProperty {}` directly, which may specify properties that have not previously been declared or defined

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Amending a property/entry `someProperty {}` directly, which may specify properties that have not previously been declared or defined.
```

> * Invoking `new` without type information `new {}`, which amends a contextually inferred value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Invoking `new` without type information `new {}`, which amends a contextually inferred value.
```

> * Invoking `new` with explicit type information: `new Dynamic {}`, which always amends the default value of the specified type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Invoking `new` with explicit type information: `new Dynamic {}`, which always amends the default value of the specified type.
```

> * Invoking `new` with explicit type information: `new Dynamic {}`, which always amends the default value of the specified type

Reviewer: nit: I think readability would be improved if you created a code block showing all 3 types of instantiation and then used notes to explain them, pointing back to the code.

When amending previously undeclared properties and using the untyped `new` invocation, there is no explicit parent value to amend.
In these cases, Pkl infers the amend operation's parent value based on context.
In order of precedence:

> 1. When amending an existing value, the parent value's type is used.

Reviewer 3: Nit picking, but the parent value's type is never used. It's just the value itself that gets amended.

> 2. When amending a declared but undefined property, the property's explicit type's default value is used (<<amend-null, including `null`>>).

Reviewer 3: Pardon the pedantry, but _technically_ this isn't accurate; declaring a property will also give it a default value (i.e. `foo: Foo` will give `foo` the default value as declared in `Foo`, if any).

> 3. Within a `Listing` or `Mapping`, the container's `default` value is used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Within a `Listing` or `Mapping`, the container's (function-typed) `default` property is applied to the corresponding index, respectively key, to produce the value to be amended.
```

> 4. Within a `Listing` or `Mapping`, the default value of the container's explicit element or entry value type argument is used.

Reviewer 3: Similar to `2.`; if I declare `foos: Listing<Foo>`, then `foos.default` is initialised to `(_) -> new Foo {}`

5. In module or object body context, when no type information is otherwise available, an empty `Dynamic` object is used.

> 6. In other cases, type inference fails with the error message "Cannot tell which parent to amend".

Reviewer: nit: again, having a code block showing all these cases would make it easier for newcomers to understand these concepts.

These rules yield some corollaries that may not be obvious:
 

> * Instantiating with explicit type information ignores a collection's `default` value.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Instantiating with explicit type information ignores a collection's `default` property.
```

<<blank-identifiers,Blank Identifiers>> +
<<projects,Projects>>

[[object-instantiation]]

> === Object Instantiation
> 
> Object instantiation in Pkl always <<amending-objects, amends>> _some_ value.
> The `new` keyword is a special case of amending where a contextual default value is amended. 
> In Pkl, objects can be instantiated in three major ways:
> 
> * Amending some parent property or value directly.
> * Invoking `new` with explicit type information, which always amends the default value of the specified type.
> * Invoking `new` without type information, which amends a contextually inferred value.

Reviewer 2: I think that the concept of amending a parent is pretty different to what the rest of this section covers. I don't know if we should group that together here; I'm thinking it might be better to just talk about `new` specifically.

```suggestion
=== Meaning of `new`

Objects in Pkl always <<amending-objects, amends>> _some_ value.
The `new` keyword is a special case of amending where a contextual value is amended. 
In Pkl, there are two forms of `new` objects:

* `new` with explicit type information, for example, `new Foo {}`.
* `new` without type information, for example, `new {}`.
```

> To understand instantiation cases without explicit parent or type information, it's important to first understand implicit default values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== Type defaults

To understand instantiation cases without explicit parent or type information, it's important to first understand default values of types.
```

When a property is declared in a module or class but is not provided an explicit default value, the property's default value becomes the type's default value.
Similarly, when `Listing` and `Mapping` types are declared with explicit type arguments for their element or value, their `default` property amends that declared type.
When `Listing` and `Mapping` types are declared without type arguments, their `default` property amends an empty `Dynamic` object.
Some types, including `Pair` and primitives like `String`, `Number`, and `Boolean` have no default value; attempting to render such a property results in the error "Tried to read property `<name>` but its value is undefined".

[source,{pkl}]
----
class Gizmo {
  name: String = "doodad"
}

gizmo: Gizmo // <1>
gizmoListing: Listing<Gizmo> // <2>
gizmoMapping: Mapping<String, Gizmo> // <3> 

> ----

Reviewer 2: Can we make this bird themed?

<1> Without an explicit default value, this property has default value `new Gizmo { name = "doodad" }`

> <2> With an explicit element type argument, this property's default value is equivalent to `new Listing<Gizmo> { default = new Gizmo { name = "doodad" } }`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> With an explicit element type argument, this property's default value is equivalent to `new Listing<Gizmo> { default = (_) -> new Gizmo { name = "doodad" } }`
```

<3> With an explicit value type argument, this property's default value is equivalent to `new Mapping<String, Gizmo> { default = (_) -> new Gizmo { name = "doodad" } }`

> ==== Explicit Parent
> 
> Explicit amending is covered in detail by <<amending-objects, Amending Objects>>.
> Amending a property, entry, or value results in a new value with the same type as the parent.
> When amending a property that has not been previously declared, an empty `Dynamic` object is used as the parent.
> 
> [source,{pkl}]
> ----
> newProperty { // <1>
>   hello = "world"
> }
> amendedProperty = (newProperty) { // <2> 
>   hello = "there"
> }
> someMapping = new Mapping {
>   ["greetings"] { // <3>
>     hello = "everyone"
>   }
> }
> ----
> <1> Amending a property.
> <2> Amending a value.
> <3> Amending a new `Mapping` entry.
> 

Reviewer 2: Per my previous comment; I don't know if this section belongs here; it's kind of a different concept.

But, FYI, `newProperty {}` means: `newProperty = (super.newProperty) {}`. And only if there is no supermodule, `super.newProperty` will give you `new Dynamic {}`. Otherwise, an error is thrown.

In a similar vein, `["someEntry"] {}` means `["someEntry"] = (super["someEntry"]) {}`

```suggestion
```

==== Explicitly Typed `new`

Instantiating an object with `new <type>` results in a value that amends the specified type's default value.

> Notably, creating a `Listing` element or assigning a `Mapping` value with an explicitly typed `new` ignores a collection's `default` value.

Reviewer 2: `Collection` is the base type of `List` and `Set`. We avoid this term unless referring to those two types specifically.

```suggestion
Notably, creating a `Listing` element or assigning a `Mapping` entry value with an explicitly typed `new` ignores the object's `default` value.
```

[source,{pkl}]
----

> newProperty = new Dynamic { // <1>
>   hello = "world"
> }
> someListing = new Listing {
>   default {
>     isDefault = true
>   }
>   new Dynamic { // <2>
>     hello = "there"
>   }
> }
> someMapping = new Mapping {
>   default {
>     isDefault = true
>   }
>   ["greetings"] = new Dynamic { // <3>
>     hello = "everyone"
>   }
> }
> ----
> <1> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a property.
> <2> Adding an `new` explicitly-typed `Listing` element.
> The value will not have property `isDefault = true` as the `default` property of the `Listing` is not used.
> <3> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a `Mapping` entry.
> The value will not have property `isDefault = true` as the `default` property of the `Mapping` is not used.

Reviewer 2: Changed this a bit to be a bit more canonical Pkl (avoid Dynamic), and use our Bird theme.

```suggestion
class Bird {
  /// The name of the bird
  name: String

  /// Whether this is a bird of prey or not.
  isPredatory: Boolean?
}

newProperty = new Bird { // <1>
  name = "Warbler"
}

someListing = new Listing<Bird> {
  default {
    isPredatory = true
  }
  new Bird { // <2>
    name = "Sand Piper"
  }
}

someMapping = new Mapping<String, Bird> {
  default {
    isPredatory = true
  }
  ["Penguin"] = new Bird { // <3>
    name = "Penguin"
  }
}
----
<1> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a property.
<2> Adding an `new` explicitly-typed `Listing` element.
The value will not have property `isPredatory = true` as the `default` property of the `Listing` is not used.
<3> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a `Mapping` entry.
The value will not have property `isPredatory = true ` as the `default` property of the `Mapping` is not used.
```

> ==== Untyped `new`

Reviewer: Even though untyped is technically correct, it may give the idea that the resulting value has no type. I think "Implicitly typed `new`", or perhaps, "Raw `new`" is a better name here.

When using the implicitly typed `new` invocation, there is no explicit parent value to amend.
In these cases, Pkl infers the amend operation's parent value based on context.

> In order of precedence:

Reviewer 2: There's no precedence here--what Pkl does depends on what the object member is.

Property: amend the class default value.
Entry/Element: call the default function of the enclosing object with my key/index.

```suggestion
```

> 1. When assigning to a declared property, the property's default value is amended (<<amend-null, including `null`>>).
> 2. Within a `Listing` or `Mapping`, the container's function-typed `default` property is applied to the corresponding index or key, respectively, to produce the value to be amended.
> 3. In module or object body context, when no type information is otherwise available, an empty `Dynamic` object is amended.
> 4. In other cases, type inference fails with the error message "Cannot tell which parent to amend".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. When assigning to a property, the property's default value is amended (<<amend-null, including `null`>>). If there is no type associated with the property, an empty `Dynamic` object is amended.
2. When assigning to an entry (e.g. a `Mapping` member) or element (e.g. a `Listing` member), the enclosing object's `default` property is applied to the corresponding index or key, respectively, to produce the value to be amended.
3. Otherwise, evaluation fails with the error message "Cannot tell which parent to amend".
```

> Currently, the type information of a <<methods,method>> parameter is not used for type inference, which may lead to surprising type inference errors.
> In this case, argument type information should be specified explicitly.

Reviewer 2: "Currently" suggests that this will change in the future, but I'm not so sure that we can ever change this.

```suggestion
The type information of a <<methods,method>> parameter is not used for type inference.
In this case, argument type information should be specified explicitly.
```

[source,{pkl}]
----
class Gizmo {
  name: String

  function gizmofy(items: Listing<String>): Listing<String> = new {
    for (item in items) {
      "\(name):\(item)"
    }
  }
}
typedProperty: Gizmo = new { // <1>
  name = "doodad"
}
untypedProperty = new { // <2>
  hello = "world"
}
typedListing: Listing<Gizmo> = new {
  new { // <3>
    name = "thingy"
  }
}
untypedListing: Listing = new {
  new { // <4>
    hello = "there"
  }
}
typedMapping: Mapping<String, Gizmo> = new {
  default { entryKey ->
    name = entryKey
  }
  ["doohicky"] = new { // <5>
    name = "thingamabob"
  }
}
amendedMapping = (typedMapping) {
  ["doohicky"] = new {} // <6>
}

doodadGizmos = typedProperty.gizmofy(new { "widget"; "whatchamacallit" }) // <7>

> ----

Reviewer 2: Can we make this bird themed?

Also, I think we should include the case where `new {}` amends a class property's default value. Something like:

```pkl
class Aviary {
  birds: Listing<Bird> = new {
    new { name = "Osprey" }
  }
}

aviary: Aviary = new {
  birds = new { // <-- this amends `new Listing { new Bird { name = "Osprey" } } and you end up with two birds here
    new { name = "Kiwi" }
  }
}
```

  }
}

someMapping = new Mapping<String, Bird> {
  default {
    isPredatory = true
  }
  ["Penguin"] = new Bird { // <3>
    name = "Penguin"
  }
}
----
<1> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a property.
<2> Adding an `new` explicitly-typed `Listing` element.
The value will not have property `isPredatory = true` as the `default` property of the `Listing` is not used.
<3> Assigning a `new` explicitly-typed value to a `Mapping` entry.
The value will not have property `isPredatory = true` as the `default` property of the `Mapping` is not used.

==== Implicitly Typed `new`

When using the implicitly typed `new` invocation, there is no explicit parent value to amend.
In these cases, Pkl infers the amend operation's parent value based on context:

* When assigning to a declared property, the property's default value is amended (<<amend-null, including `null`>>).
If there is no type associated with the property, an empty `Dynamic` object is amended.
* When assigning to an entry (e.g. a `Mapping` member) or element (e.g. a `Listing` member), the enclosing object's `default` property is applied to the corresponding index or key, respectively, to produce the value to be amended.

> * In other cases, type inference fails with the error message "Cannot tell which parent to amend".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In other cases, evaluation fails with the error message "Cannot tell which parent to amend".
```

> The type information of a <<methods,method>> parameter is not used for type inference.
> In this case, argument type information should be specified explicitly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type annotation of a <<methods,method>> parameter is not used for inference.
In this case, the argument's type should be specified explicitly.
```
